Solving the global mental health crisis,
it's a first order problem.
One in three of us [music] will
experience depression or anxiety.
And I realized that this could be one of
the biggest opportunities and businesses
in the world.
Michael Actton [music] Smith. He's the
billionaire founder of the mindful
meditation and sleep app, Calm.
Everyone thought we were crazy. The
bridge between the seed money we raised
and getting to a series A took years and
years. And then that was where the point
was like, we're taking off. It's
happening. Never have we been assailed
with more noise and stimulation. From
social media to billboards to TV, it's
coming at us constantly. One of the most
valuable skills in the 21st century is
to be able to decide where and how and
when we put our attention. The human
brain is the most complex thing in the
[music] known universe. And yet, it
doesn't come with an instruction manual.
Quick one. Can you do me a favor if
you're listening to this and hit the
subscribe button? the follow button
wherever you're listening to this
podcast. Thank you so much. Michael
Actton Smith. He's the billionaire
founder of the mindful meditation and
sleep app calm. For the last 10 years,
Michael has been one of the great UK
entrepreneurial success stories. But the
really staggering thing about Michael's
story is how many successes he had that
turned quickly into failures. and
honestly how he rose time and time and
time again from those ashes to rebuild
an even more successful business. Most
people would give up and you almost
wouldn't blame them when you hear what
Michael's been through. His most recent
success car is worth billions and
billions of dollars and it helps people
who are going through hard times or any
pain at all reach mindfulness. It
teaches them the importance of slowing
down, stopping and meditation. So, one
would think Michael had an easy life and
he was the master of his mind, but he
goes through the same battles as
everyone else. And he describes this
last year as the hardest of his entire
life. Michael, thank you for being so
honest on this podcast. Thank you for
your vulnerability because I know this
conversation is going to help everybody
that takes the time to listen to it. So,
without further ado, I'm Steven Bartlett
and this is the Diary of a CEO. I hope
nobody's listening, but if you are, then
please keep this to yourself. [music]
Michael, you've been described in the
press as this uh this kind of like
entrepreneurial rockstar
character. And when I when I read
through your story, I was surprised and
inspired and blown away by how early
that entrepreneurial bug appeared in
your life. When you look back at your
younger years, are you able to pinpoint
what you were good at? The thing that
made you different from your peers in
terms of skill, your skill set or
talent?
Uh, I'm not sure. I was very
impressively mediocre at school. Like
right right in the middle. definitely
not uh uh in the top set uh for
anything. But I think I if I had to pin
down one characteristic, it would
probably be curiosity. I was just
fascinated by lots of different things.
And my dad was a librarian. He used to
bring books home for me and my sister
all the time on all sorts of random
subjects and I'd just devour them. And
and so I think that kind of sparked uh
this interest in in [clears throat]
different areas of life. And I think
when you start when you're curious um
everything becomes interesting in life.
Everyone you chat to, every magazine you
pick up, every country you go to and uh
you start to kind of connect dots
between different things. And I think
that's a really important part of the
entrepreneurial mindset.
That inspires creativity then, right?
Because if you're if you've got so many
dots to pick from, you can create new
things, right?
Exactly. Yeah. So I think you know along
with curiosity, I think uh creativity is
uh is part of it as well. I love ideas.
I love taking the the random things that
are kind of rattling around my head,
putting them onto a sheet of paper,
playing around with them, thinking about
them from different angles, and then
taking the best ones and putting them
out there in the world. And this is the
beauty of being an entrepreneur. You
know, you can talk about stuff
endlessly, but only when you meet the
market do you find out whether there's
any merit to your ideas and you can see
whether people actually resonate and use
or buy or talk about whatever it is that
you're creating. I just love that.
Sales. Your sister said that uh I had a
little story she told about you going to
car boot sales and being a really
remarkable seller when you were younger
at car boot sales. What role has was was
that apparent when you were younger that
you were you had a talent for selling
things? I don't know if I I've ever
thought of myself as a good salesperson.
I think I get very animated and
energized and and passionate about
things I really really believe in, which
I think is probably a key part of of
being good at at selling things. Um,
yeah, we used to it was one of the many
many uh uh endeavors when we were
younger going to car boot sales and
selling things and trying to match them
with uh the people that were walking by.
So interesting she said that. I never
knew that. Did Did you fit Did you fit
in?
Not [clears throat] really. No, if I if
I'm honest, I was a little bit of a um a
square peg in a round hole at at school.
Um was quite small for my age and uh
just didn't quite it's hard to describe,
but didn't quite click or understand the
the cool kids and and kind of what was
going on. I think maybe that sort of
forced me to kind of retreat into myself
a little bit. I became very passionate
about reading as I mentioned. Kind of
went down the path more of um uh sort of
social pursuits rather than going to
parties and events and I was pretty
introverted and and shy uh until I got
to university.
Were you ever bullied in school? Did you
ever
I wouldn't I wouldn't describe it as
bullied, but I I would certainly not
class myself as one of the kind of um
the cool kids sort of on the on the
periphery looking in rather than uh in
the center of of everything that was
going on.
And then at university that changed
somehow.
It did. I kind of, you know, the beauty
about university is you can reinvent
yourself and and you leave all the kind
of uh sort of perceptions and and views
that people have of you when when you
get there. And uh so met some amazing
friends and I just decided to kind of
lean into everything. Joined every club
going, chatted to everyone I could. It
was a big kind of flip and some of my
best friends now, you know, I met uh at
university during that period.
And on that point of um identity, when
you got to university, you could you
could finally start, I guess, exploring
your who you who you actually are. And
you shed that identity from school, shed
a lot of the maybe limiting beliefs
about public perceptions of who you
were. And um at some point that went on
to starting Firebox later in
Fire. It was a bit later on, right?
1998.
Exactly. Yeah. So um Tom, who I met at
at university, and I uh were always
talking about business ideas, but when
we left university, we both got sensible
jobs. you know, we were in debt uh and
needed to um make some money. And so my
passion at that time was I wanted to
become a trader uh in an investment
bank. I'd watched Wall Street and
thought it was the most interesting
world ever, you know, snapping the red
braces and just kind of buying and
selling and dealing. And I lived in a
little town called Marlo. And I saw in
the newspaper that there was a job ad uh
for a leasing company uh company cars.
And it it said you will be working with
uh investment banks in London. And I
didn't know anyone that worked in the
city. Um I did a geography degree. So
there wasn't I couldn't go in through
the front door to get a job in a bank.
So I thought this could be my route in.
So, I got the job and uh just uh worked
as hard as I could, tried to get noticed
and I got put on the Goldman Sachs
account and I thought, "This is
amazing." Uh I travel up to London 2
days a week and got to work in their
offices in the HR department and uh I
remember reading um the FT and The
Economist and and when I'd meet the
traders, I'd like throw in kind of
random tips about things I'd read um
hoping I'd get noticed and invited to to
join the company. Of course, that that
never happened. And what I realized was
that this probably wasn't the the world
for me. It it didn't kind of click. It
was great to kind of try on that uh that
uh jacket for size to see what it was
like, but it it just it didn't kind of
speak to my soul. It just felt uh a bit
false. There was no creativity to it.
And so um after uh about 6 months or so
uh stepped away from that and Tom had
left to he was programming breathalyzers
in Wales uh [laughter] uh which was
quite an entertaining job. He'd have to
drink Canella to calibrate these
breathalyzers he was working on. They
were used by the police. Um but we both
weren't uh we both weren't clicking with
what we had. And yeah, we'd meet up and
talk about business ideas and the
internet was just starting to kind of
really gain momentum sort of around 9798
and uh it was during one of our chats in
the pub that the light bulb went on and
we we realized uh maybe we should leave
and set up our own business.
So take me through that journey. So you
you hand in your resignation at some
point or do you start while you're still
at that company? So it was a little bit
of crossover as there usually is kind of
um thinking about the the idea but um
once the idea that Tom and I were
chatting about just became so
all-consuming that was the moment when
we like right let's dive into the
unknown leap out of the airplane and
figure this out as we uh plummet to
earth and uh Tom was living just outside
of Cardiff and uh I remember we were
again walking around town chatting we
went into a bookshop and we saw this
book uh that was called um doing
business on the internet and we knew we
were both aware Tom did AI and computer
science at university. So we knew
something was going on in this in this
world but we clubbed together. We put
£10 in each to buy this book which was a
lot of money for us living pretty much
hand-to-mouth. And I just remember
reading it and just having my mind blown
by you know what felt like what was
coming. This was going to change
everything. How we did commerce, how we
connected with each other, how we were
entertained. and Tom was just fascinated
by this book as well. So that was kind
of that became our bible to create um
what was Hotbox which then became
Firebox the uh the gadget the games the
sort of uh online retailer.
[clears throat]
And so that was like kind of like an
obscure gift um gadget
re online retailer.
Yes. Yeah. We felt that you know again
this is the early days of of the
internet. It was um predominantly
[gasps] uh young youngish people who
were on it who were sort of figuring out
how to um uh connect. It wasn't the
easiest thing in the world. AOL was just
kind of getting going. The search
engines weren't fully developed. Um it
was a lot more men than than women on
the internet at this time. And we
thought, what if we could sell unusual
toys and gadgets and games, kind of
quirky stuff. Um, and uh, it was sort of
inspired by the Innovations catalog and
Sharper Image in America. And so that
was the idea. And we would find products
that we thought were quite cool. We
would list them online and then when
someone bought them, we would then go
and buy the product uh, from whoever was
selling it because we didn't have the
cash flow to, you know, hold anything in
stock and then um, send it out to the
individual. It certainly wasn't Amazon
next day delivery. Yeah,
it was pretty clunky.
And the payment systems on the internet
time.
Well, this is really interesting cuz you
know around this time when we told
people we were going to set up a
business online, we got a few different
reactions. One was that uh eye rolling.
People would tell us no one is going to
buy anything online. You know, you have
to put your credit card in line and you
know who's going to do that? Far too
risky and dangerous. So that was the
prevailing wisdom. The second feedback
we got was that the only people making
money online are kind of porn barons. Uh
so um uh but we were like no we think
there's a a revolution happening here.
We think look at all the mail order
cataloges. Look at the money being made.
The internet is a much more efficient
way of doing this. And this is long
before Shopify, long before Stripe. So
Tom was the technical genius. He kind of
uh built uh a website and uh we couldn't
figure out how to take payments online.
So what we had to do was um if you
wanted to order anything from our site,
you had to find the product you wanted.
Then you had to print out uh an order
form. Uh then you had to fill it in with
all your details. Then you had to write
down your credit card details. Then you
had to fax that to us using JFax. I
would print it out, type all the details
in. We had a PDQ machine from the bank
that I would manually type in and then
that would uh take the money and then I
would put the product uh once it arrived
in a package and and send it out. It was
incredibly inefficient. And fortunately,
we only had about one order a month. So
it was [laughter] uh
uh we we certainly um weren't in danger
of setting any kind of uh commerce
records, but it it just it was it was a
very interesting period. Many months
this went on and um uh it just allowed
us to kind of sort of test the systems
and figure out what was going on and day
by day just get a little bit better. And
we had an amazing friend called Matt
Shonne who we also met at university.
And he would use secret names to order
from the site to kind of cheer us up and
and let us feel that there were people
out there buying these products. He only
admitted that to us a little bit later,
but that kind of kept uh kept our energy
and our our spirits up as kind of we sat
there waiting for orders to come in.
What was the heights of that website?
What was the highest moment? Well,
amazingly it's it's still going now a
quarter of a century almost it's been
going which is mindboggling to think uh
an inter internet company.
I think the the real kind of uh tipping
point for that business was when we made
our own products. So instead of selling
other people's products uh where the
margins were just very thin and you
could buy from other places we developed
our own IP. And that was a real kind of
light bulb moment for me recognizing
that to do anything in business, you
really got to create something yourself,
you know, make something that hasn't
existed before. So during one of our
many board meetings and creative
sessions in the pub, Tom and I Tom and I
were um uh watching someone line up
tequila shots across the bar. And this
turned into a conversation of um they
look like pawns on a chessboard. You
know, what if we could create chess but
make it more interesting? turn it into
the drinking person's thinking game. Uh,
and you could have 32 glasses on a board
and you fill them all with alcohol, red
wine against white wine or whiskey
against vodka if you're very hardcore.
You move the pieces as normal, but every
time you capture a piece, you have to
drink it. So, you could make a queen
sacrifice, which would be like three
shots, make your opponent very drunk and
hopefully kind of uh balance things. And
we just thought this was a really
unusual idea. and we sent out a press
release for it to a bunch of magazines.
We didn't know about PR companies who
went into WHSmith one day and scribbled
down all the addresses and the names of
the editors and sent this out and the
reaction was amazing. We suddenly had
all these magazines wanting to hear
about this incredible shot glass chess
set. And so the other light bulb moment
there was storytelling, you know, do
something different. Uh we created this
story about these two broke ex- students
who'd made this game and we were in FHM
and loaded and Maxim and uh we made the
local Welsh newspaper and we even made
it to page three of the sun which was
quite exciting. Not the the main picture
fortunately. [laughter] No um you
definitely no one wants to see to see us
[laughter] but uh yeah a little snippet
and suddenly the orders just started to
pour in. It was uh it was a real
goosebump inducing moment
and it's so there's two things there. I
want to just touch on the lesson you
said you learned about PR and
storytelling. I'm guessing that's a
lesson that stayed with you till today.
Oh boy. Absolutely.
And what are the principles of that
lesson? What is what's the principles of
storytelling for you that you learned
then?
Well,
everyone is interested in the human
angle. You know, if if you look at every
article about a business, it almost
always centers on on the human angle.
the stories of people using that
products, the lives that have been
transformed. You know, storytelling is
such a powerful way of of of
[clears throat] communicating and and
connecting with other people, the the
the the struggle, the resolution, the
transformation at the end. There's an
amazing book by Will Store called the
science of storytelling which kind of
talks about this in in great great
detail. And I think about it with every
business I create, every time I'm
pitching my business to investors or
trying to encourage someone to join. So
it's a key piece I think of the the
entrepreneurial journey. And so yeah, we
realized that, you know, if we could
instead of putting out press releases
saying this is our business and this is
how much money it makes and this is our
margin, you talk about the the human
angle and uh the story and the struggle
and those aspects and it it makes it
much more interesting. M
and at some point you decide to depart
in from this business.
Yes. Yeah. So, uh this was many years in
the business was was going well. We'd
built a team. We'd moved from Wales to
London. Uh we went to one of the first
first Tuesday events. I don't know if
anyone listening remembers, but we read
about this uh in the Guardian. this this
um networking event where entrepreneurs
and and investors came together to do
deals and yeah we were living in this
attic in Cardiff and we thought oh my
goodness we need to be in London the
promised land where the streets are
paved with gold. So literally within a
few days we just piled up a van and
drove to London and went to this event
and the very first one we went to we met
an investor who uh um we met with him
and the team and and they invested in
the business and and we were just like
blown away. So yes, Firebox grew for
many years, got got much much bigger,
but after a while, I decided I I wanted
to try something new. You know, the
entrepreneurial brain had been wearing
away. There was a a new concept I was
incredibly excited about and I had some
very honest and uh important chats with
Tom and uh I I stepped away and uh
created Mind Candy, which was uh the
next big adventure I was about to embark
on.
Why why why did you step away though? So
you're you're saying there that you kind
of ran out of love or excitement for the
business ultimately? Were you were you
at this point personally financially
free
and stable or?
No. No. Quite a a long way from it. You
know, we'd been building the business.
We hadn't sold any shares. We hadn't
taken any money out of the business. We
were paying ourselves a very modest
salary. And uh it was a it was a a
challenging business to run. So, we
certainly we were we were stable. We
were profitable because we kind of had
to be, but it it certainly wasn't
throwing off a lot of cash, but I just
felt that I was I there was a new idea
that I just couldn't stop thinking about
that was waking me up every single night
at 4:00 a.m. And I just felt I had to
answer that call and I certainly didn't
want to leave Firebox or Tom or the team
in the lurch. So again we had some very
important conversations as I mentioned
but uh [sighs] yeah I felt I had to go
and do something new and the internet
had evolved quite a bit since the first
you know the web one era web two was
just gathering pace you know it was not
just the read web it was the read write
web people were creating crowdsourcing
and it just felt like I I had to yeah I
had to answer this call
that's really interesting you describe
it as a call I was I was trying to think
about a way to um give advice vice to
entrepreneurs that have lots of ideas as
all entrepreneurs and creatives do um
how to filter out the ones worth
pursuing. And I was I was saying one of
the things I think I've done over the
years in hindsight is there's almost
this Sunday shelf in my mind where like
new ideas come I put them on the Sunday
shelf and if they like nag me and if
they stay at the front of the shelf and
like Steve, you know, then I'll pursue
them. But if they kind of fade off into
the background and collect dust and
vanish, then I don't pursue them. It
sounds like you're talking about a
similar mental system where if it nags
you long enough, you pursue. Very very
very true. And I think this is a really
important point. There's a lot of
entrepreneurs, many listening to to this
podcast who probably have uh a great
idea. Maybe they've started, maybe
they're still thinking about it. And
what I think is fascinating about this
current moment in time is it's very easy
to start a business. You know, there are
so many tools out there to use and build
upon to get going on day one. There's a
lot of investment uh chasing great
deals. And I think that's a positive
thing and a negative thing. And I see
this there are too many people that just
launch before they fully bake their
idea. They haven't built the foundation
of the skyscraper they want to build.
And so they raise the money, they build
the team, but they're being blown around
like a a paper bag uh as soon as they
get new information. And that's a scary
place to be spinning around once you've
got a team, once the clock is ticking,
once the investors are on board. What I
would strongly urge, and I've done this
with every business I've set set up, is
go slow to go fast. Do the work up
front. Spend months, sometimes years,
researching what it is that you're
intrigued about. Marinade yourself in
this idea, you know, go to the the
business conferences, read every book
you can, the documentaries, speak to
people in the space, and a really
interesting thing starts to happen. you
start connecting these dots. This
invisible work that no one else may be
aware of is you finding the the magic,
finding the secret to this industry,
discovering where the the the
opportunity is, where the alpha is. And
once you've done that, you get to a
point, as you say, whether it's the
front of the shelf or whether it's for
me it's the idea that just wakes me up
every single night. That's at the point
where you're like, "Right, let's go.
This is it. It you can't hold it back
any longer." and you have those strong
foundations to then build upon going
forward
and to communicate to the world exactly
what you're
exactly it's then a very crisp very
clear idea. Now the the key here is it
can change over time but um you start
from very strong foundations and and
then uh you you have that conviction and
that is very magnetic for other people
to to be around the first wave of
employees the investors that you bring
on board the journalists that you chat
to. So yeah, that's my my philosophy.
Not rushing into new ideas, taking
taking time to let them fully fully get
ready before before you move.
The problem entrepreneurs have in their
mind, I think, and I'm thinking people
listening to that, why don't they heed
that really great sound advice is
because they always think that there is
a real urgency to the challenge they're
trying to solve.
They see it as they're in a 100 meter
sprint
and they need to go now and go fast
which means raise tons of capital and
start sprinting
and it always feels no matter what
industry um people are launching their
businesses in whether it's like someone
launching cupcakes on Instagram in the
pandemic cuz sourdough exploded they
think it's now or never. What would you
say to that?
Yeah, it's a really good point. It it
feels like that if what you're doing is
surface level, if what you're responding
to is just other companies you're seeing
doing well or an article you read last
week uh and you haven't done that deep
work, it does feel like urgent and you
have to run cuz the the race the
starting gun is already gone. If you do
the deep work, you recognize that you
can go a little bit slower because the
market hasn't fully formed yet. It's
almost one great analogy I think is
surfing. Um when you're waiting for that
wave, you don't want to be too late
obviously because everyone's caught the
wave and away they go. And you don't
want to be way way too early uh while
you're paddling there, you know, in the
freezing cold waiting for the sun to
come up cuz you'll freeze to death. You
need to be a little bit early um where
you feel a little bit of the cold and
then suddenly the sun comes up and you
see that big wave coming and you're
ready for it and you catch it and woo
you go. And there's nothing quite like
that being one of the first players
riding a wave in in a new market. And it
felt like that for for calm and, you
know, meditation and mindfulness. Alex
and I were out there paddling in the
freezing cold waters, waiting for that
wave for years. And everyone thought we
were a little bit crazy. Um, but we
weren't laying the foundations. We were
doing the the deep work and the
research. And then, uh, we were ready
when that wave hit.
Quick one. At this time of year, we
always see a huge spike in the amount of
people that are buying hule and joining
the hooligan camp, I guess. Um, and I
think that speaks to the role that hule
plays in my life, but also the role it
plays to a lot of people's lives, which
is as we start to get a little bit
busier, typically we fall into the trap
of going for convenience food. And
convenience food for a lot of us means
like junk food or lots of sugary stuff.
Whereas hule kind of safeguards us in
that part of our lives. It's completely
nutritionally complete as you'll know
from listening to this podcast and I say
it every single time. I've had more tags
on Instagram of people joining Hule in
the last I'd say couple of weeks of
January than I have in the whole last
quarter of the year. So if there was a
time where you're thinking about giving
it a shot, here's my recommendation. Try
the salted caramel flavor. That's my
personal favorite. We all have different
preferences. The banana flavor I
absolutely adore. I love the cinnamon
swirl flavor and also the protein
powder. The salted caramel flavor again
that sits on top of my fridge over there
is um incredibly useful if you are
working out and you're trying to get
high levels of protein into your body.
Give it a go. Tag me on Instagram. Let
me know what you think and come and
become a hooligan with me.
So after Firebox, you you went on to
Mind Candy.
Yes,
Yeah.
And Perplex City.
Perplex City indeed.
That phase. [laughter]
Oh wow. All right. This is going back uh
back a feral way. The reason why I
stepped away from from Firefox and the
idea that I couldn't stop thinking about
was around games and I've always loved
games. You know, I mentioned chess. I
love Scrabble and Batgam and video games
like Dungeons and Dragons. Created all
my own games. But I saw something really
interesting happening just after the the
the new millennium. And it was could the
internet revolutionize how we play
games. Instead of games being, you know,
uh just you and your mate playing on
[snorts] a Nintendo or or whatever,
could games be for three or four people
or 10 people or hundreds? What if games
could be played by millions of people?
You know, the the massively multiplayer
online gaming boom that that was just
getting going there with World of
Warcraft and some of the ones coming out
of the Far East. So, that was what I I
couldn't stop thinking about. And so
Perplex City was this idea, what if we
could create a game that didn't just
live online, it lived offline as well.
That it would it would be all around
you. It would be you would be a hero in
sort of part game, part story, part
movie. Um I'd watched uh there's an
interesting theme here, watched a movie
that I couldn't stop thinking about
called The Game with Michael Douglas
where this person doesn't know whether
it's real life or a game that they're
part of. and I I just wanted to to bring
that to the the world. So that was the
starting point of Perplex City. Um we
raised some money. We buried a treasure
somewhere in the world that was worth uh
£100,000 reward for the first person
that found it. It
it was found a couple of years later um
by the very passionate audience and
community that was playing this game.
But we released clues uh we had clues in
classified sections of newspapers. We
had skywriting. Uh we um uh you'd get
messages on your phone. Uh it was that
we had helicopters at live events. I
mean it was just this extraordinary
experience. Very very expensive to do
and it was called an alternate reality
game. Uh and so basically that was uh
Perplex City and it was probably one of
the most creative things I've ever
worked on. We had an incredible team and
a very passionate audience playing it.
Unfortunately, it was one of the most
commercially disastrous things I've
worked on. And my goodness, I I learned
some really valuable lessons building
that.
So, I I read that it cost $9 million.
About 9 million. Yeah. We raised um
roughly 10 million and we'd burnt
through almost all of it. Uh about 9
million. And uh I was going back to
waking up in the middle of the night.
This time was I was waking up in the
middle of the night in a cold sweat
thinking this is not working. this is
not right. And the problem was the
outside world was saying what a
brilliant idea this was. We were winning
awards. We were in the press all the
time. It looked like we were geniuses.
But in reality, deep in my kind of pit
of my stomach, I was like, "Oh my
goodness, we are heading towards a cliff
very very fast and uh I need to do
something urgently
because you hadn't figured out the b the
underlying business model."
Correct. So we had a model. So you would
buy these trading cards bit like Pokémon
cards. You'd get a random collection of
six in a pack for a few pounds. And uh
these puzzles then played into a larger
puzzle. There were 256 of them to
collect. There were all sorts of hidden
clues within them. And we sold a fair
few. We made a bit of money, but it was
nowhere near enough to cover the costs
of this very expensive game we were
running. So the just the the economics
and the business business model didn't
make sense. And so yeah, as I say, we
were running out of money fast. I didn't
think we'd be able to raise another
round and I was just very stressed,
extremely worried about what uh what to
do
when when you say so two points want to
pick up on there. When you say I was
extremely stressed, give me a a clear
picture of what that means in real terms
on a day-to-day basis.
So just just
sitting there I I still can remember
sitting at the office in Batisy just
looking at the the team kind of working
away. Um, everyone have been smiling and
me staring at my screen knowing where
our bank balance was and how fast we
were burning money and thinking that in
a couple of months this whole thing is
going to be have to shut down will be
declared bankrupt. I may never be
allowed to be a director again. You
know, it was quite terrifying and not
almost being paralyzed and frozen with
fear, not knowing what to do next, like
how do I solve this? Who do I speak to
about it? Um, I was a sole founder in
that business so it was kind of tricky.
I had an amazing COO uh slash CFO slash
everything see everything o Deinia
Nolles who worked closely with me but um
yeah I I just didn't really know how to
solve this conundrum we were in and it
manifested in high blood pressure
sleepless nights uh not eating well um
just yeah all the classic signs of um
[clears throat] stress and and burnout.
And was there a day where you had to
make that tough decision to wind the
company down and to bring it to an end?
And how was that? What was that moment
like?
There was and I I kept putting it off.
Uh you know that was a horrible thing to
do. But one morning I um invited the
whole team. There was about 25 of us
into our conference room, sat everyone
down. I was shaking like a leaf. Um and
uh you know these people had believed
me. They they followed me to this
company, this big vision that I painted
for them all. and I basically just had
to say, "This is not working. We're
running out of cash. We're going to have
to stop and and kill this game." And it
was partway through the second season,
and there were just gasps of shock and
horror. [sighs] Uh and um
I had been thinking of a new idea.
So, it was very different to the current
idea. And so, this was what I thought
was the best thing we should do. We had,
as I say, less than a million dollars
left. We have two options. We can
continue down the path we're on and hit
the brick wall and just end or we can
pivot, do this dramatic pivot to this
new idea with the cash we've got left
and and see if we can save the company.
And uh we were going from this very
complex, fascinating um game Perplexity
to a kids game. And I tried to explain
it to people and there were there were
people shaking their heads and
scratching their heads and not knowing
what I was talking about. Amazingly, a
couple of people got it and uh wanted to
stay on. Uh we had to let many people
go, many self- selected out. Um it was
also quite a stressful board meeting. Uh
telling my board that we were going to
do this almighty pivot. And to be fair
and to give my board credit back then
they were like, "Fair enough, Michael.
You know, we we we let's do it. You
know, there there isn't really another
option. This I described it as a a final
roll of the dice and uh they all got on
board and so yeah, we kind of h took a
very different new direction and we had
some cards some some of the puzzles in
Perplex City. Um we created these little
characters called puzzle monsters and
the story of Perplex City was one of the
many stories was that um uh it was this
world of mystery and puzzles. Parents
would tell their kids if they didn't do
their homework and their puzzles, the
puzzle monsters would get them in the
middle of the night. It's quite quite
serious thinking [laughter] about it
now. Terrifying kids, giving them
nightmares. But I just love this
concept. And and so we were going to
create this new idea, this spin-off
called Puzzle Monsters for Kids, Stealth
Education, help them learn, play games
while being educated. And so that then
uh we changed the name to Moshi Monsters
because it just sounded a bit more cool,
illiterative. So that was the seed uh of
uh of Moshi.
As you look back on Perlex City and that
journey that strikes me as your first
real probably significant business fail
failing to to some degree where you you
have people's jobs and careers on the
line and you have capital a high big
amount of capital on the line. What are
the topline lessons where you reflect in
your when you're on your own and you
think I'll never do that again. I'll
never do that thing again. And this is
the key lesson that I'm gonna keep with
me for the rest of my life.
I think not getting sucked into and
believing the hype.
It's wonderful to be written about in in
[clears throat] the press. Uh it's
wonderful to win awards, but you know,
that is not what a successful business
is built on. It can help. It can give
you a little bit of momentum, but you've
really got to um understand the the
fundamentals, and you've really got to
understand the business model and the
economics. There's no point creating
something extraordinary if you don't
know how it's going to uh monetize and
and how you're going to create something
and sell it for more than you create it
for. So, you don't need to be profitable
from day one. You can build an audience,
absolutely, but you do need to know how
at some point this is going to uh become
a successful business. And this is why I
think successful businesses are so rare
because you do need founders that are
that are creative and they can see the
future and where the puck is going, but
also have strong commercial instincts
and sense and you know understand
margins and and how to kind of build the
economic machine behind their crazy
idea. Such a good point and I think I
wish someone had said that to me when I
started my first business wallpark when
I dropped out because I think I thought
people clapping and me being on news
night and like being in the press as
this 18-year-old entrepreneur was
validation of my business. So I pursu So
I got more romantic about my failing
hypothesis whereas really
the clapping and the press is validation
of an interesting story.
There you go.
Not not business model. Do you know what
I mean? So
y
how did that turn out?
Failed. [laughter]
There we go. We've both We've both got
the scars. I mean, my body is littered
with scars of of things, but the great
thing about business is you only need to
get it right once to to create a huge
success.
Um, I I was well aware of Mushy Monsters
for a variety of different reasons. Um,
tell me about the the the growth and
trajectory at the start of that. I heard
it was very slow for the first sort of
two years, 18 months.
It was Yeah. You know, everyone thinks
businesses that are successful just
happen overnight. They don't. there's a
there's a a lot of grind and and hustle
getting to that point. Um, but you know,
the idea felt very strong. This uh the
the idea of creating these little
monsters that would live online that
kids could adopt and look after. And um
I didn't know much about the kids
entertainment space, but I'd seen
Tamagotchi a few years before and I
thought, "Wow, what a business." Tens of
millions of those little beeping
[laughter]
characters were sold and I thought,
"There's something here. Could we take
that concept and before that
there'd been the pet rock which I don't
know if you ever came across that.
Yes. And Neopets.
Neop Neopets was another great great
business. I think there's something kids
in fact most of us love nurturing and
looking after things. And so I thought
in the era of Flash and uh the the web,
could we create these little monsters?
And so that was the idea. We didn't
really know how we were going to
monetize it. And um we decided uh to
create these little phone charms that we
would sell in shops and you bought a
phone charm for about £10 and then
inside would be a code that you type
into our website to adopt your monster.
Disastrous idea. I think we've still got
thousands of these phone charms sitting
in a warehouse somewhere. And it was
just too much friction. It was just too
[gasps] too many steps, too complicated.
Um, and so after about a year of trying
to make that work, we decided, do you
know what? Let's just make it free.
Forget the physical product. Forget
trying to monetize it at the start, any
child could come along and just adopt a
monster, give it a name, start kind of
um, tickling it and feeding it and uh,
customizing its room and instantly it
was just like, wow, that was the the
trigger point. Took away all the
friction and we were away. So suddenly
we went from one or two signups a day to
dozens of signups a day, then hundreds
of signups a day, then thousands. Um I
think you know our peak days were over a
100,000
um children around the world were
adopting a monster. It was it was it was
breathtaking.
So the business rose, right? And then
obviously there was a it it struggled
because of the world changed.
That's an understatement. Struggled.
Okay. Tell me about that.
Well, we thought we could do no wrong.
We were now just the usual curve of slow
growth and then rocket ship and we
thought we were going to be the next
Disney and uh we had opportunities to
sell the business for hundreds of
millions of dollars and I was like no
thank you. You know, we are taking this
all the way to the moon. Uh and
everything was just compounding. Almost
everything we did seemed to just get
bigger and bigger until it suddenly
didn't. And the summer of 2012 was when
things just suddenly stopped. And I was
like, what on earth is going on? Sure,
this is probably just an aberration. And
we thought, oh, it's cuz it's a hot
summer or because of XY Z. You know, you
kind of make excuses.
But what what had happened was that
there was a a shift, a platform shift
taking place and kids were moving from
uh using the web as their primary place
of kind of playing games. Yeah. desktop
web playing Moshi or Club Penguin or
Stardoll or Neopets or all these other
games to
iPads and the mobile revolution. And we
kind of had our head in the sand for a
little bit and thought, you know, this
this isn't really going to take off in a
in a huge way. And then we started to
lean into it and figure out how we could
adapt Moshi for this new world. But it
was very very difficult. and the just
the the economics and the way kids would
play with devices and and it was much
harder to create a monthly subscription
service, it just started to to unravel
and as fast as we'd grown, the revenue
started to to come down and kids were
playing all these new free games uh
through the app store and uh we
[sighs and gasps] uh yeah spent several
years trying to kind of write the the
ship and keep things going but um
weren't weren't able to sadly. So that
was a an incredibly stressful uh period
as well.
Another stressful period.
Another there's been quite a few. It's
why I've got so many gray hairs, but uh
again learned to learned a lot during
that period. But that was uh that was a
tough time.
Tough time as in letting people go,
having to scale down the business,
trying to find new product market fit
and
on a personal level. what was cuz I mean
that is an even higher high to to come
down from right in terms of your
identity is in like intrinsically
connected to this company and I've been
there where when your company falls it's
like your self self-esteem is falling
with it or your self-worth or your you
know your identity is falling with it
because you're intrinsically connected.
Tell me about that.
So true. Yeah, that that was exactly it.
you know, when when things are going
well, you [laughter] it's a great thing.
You feel wonderful. And the the tricky
thing was that um it was the flip that I
think was so uh stressful. The flip from
being I was sort of one of the the
poster boys of the boom. Yeah. In short,
I was on the front cover of
um Wired magazine. Uh the press were
just writing about us and me in glowing
terms all the time.
I just thought I could do no wrong. And
again, the ego just got got out of
control. And then to have that flip to
suddenly be running a business that was
falling apart. We did five rounds of
layoffs. Uh so difficult for again the
team that had followed me and join this
business having to to to be let go.
Revenue started collapsing. Board
meetings became very stressful. Press
started writing negative articles. It
was really really really tough. And as
you say, you know, like like you
mentioned, my ego, my worth, myself was
just so entwined with my business. And
now the business was failing. I was a
failure and and worthless. And so it was
a a really really difficult time. And
that lasted for years.
How did you cope with that?
[sighs]
Um,
I'm lucky in that I have a uh a very
supportive family and I have some great
friends who are also entrepreneurs and
we've kind of all we've all had
successes and and failures and at one
point some of us are doing well and some
are not. So, we kind of pick each other
up and and uh give each other important
pep talks. So, I think having that
community uh was very very helpful.
But, you know, I I wasn't when you're
struggling like that again, you you
create these vicious circles. So, you
don't sleep very well and you wake up
the next day just more tired than you
were when you went to bed and you're
irritable and your body is filled with
cortisol and adrenaline and you don't
eat well and put nutritious food in your
body and you forget to exercise. So,
yeah, all these negative things start
compounding. I was in a pretty uh bad
state. But to put things in perspective
again, I I did try and kind of be
realistic that there were people in the
world going through much trickier things
and their business falling apart. But
when it's you and you built your whole
selfworth around it, it feels like
everything is falling apart and the
world is ending. There's two questions I
wanted to ask you which was about when
you're going through those stressful
moments and at a time when men in
particular didn't really understand the
concept of mental health. Did you find
yourself turning to escapes or medicate
like medicating yourself with some kind
of escape? And the secondary question
was about the topic of mental health
broadly. When did you discover that it
was a thing?
So wow. Yeah. I um I think when we are
struggling in life, we instead of
addressing the issue, uh we mask it,
don't we? We we seek things that avoid
whatever the challenge is. And for some
people it's drugs, for some people it's
alcohol. For me, I just I became distant
from the business. I I just couldn't
face going into the office every day. I
take myself off to coffee shops. I
suppose caffeine is is not as serious a
kind of drug as some some other ones.
But um I also used to take um uh
painkillers every morning just cuz I
woke up with such a headache and my body
achd. I felt like I was hit by a truck
every morning. So these painkillers
would kind of help me get started in the
day. It was a very tricky time. So not
addressing the fundamental issues with
the business or trying to but not doing
a a very good job for me. This is what
led to calm because [clears throat] I
could see it so clearly having been
through it. You know, one of the best
businesses to ever set up is one where
you're scratching your own itch and you
understood. And I didn't know what
meditation was or or mindfulness. But my
very dear friend Alex Chu had been
meditating with CD ROMs he bought when
he was a teenager, a very unusual
teenager. And he would often say to me,
"Look, dude, you need to to try
meditation." And I'd be like, "You need
to try effing off. [laughter]
That's the last thing I need. Look, um,
give me something practical." But slowly
but surely, the the penny started to to
drop and I kind of got it. And the key
breakthrough for me was when I did
something I'd never done before. I took
myself off on a solo holiday. I went
away to the Austrian Alps to this kind
of um resort where I played tennis in
the morning. I scribbled in my notebook.
I read books and I I started to try to
meditate cuz I'd I'd heard about it. And
uh it was just incredible. The fog
started to clear. I'd been had my face
pushed up against the the cliff and
couldn't see a way out of this problem
that I was facing with my business. And
just taking a step back and getting
perspective was hugely valuable. And I
read a bunch of books and research
papers and and I realized that you know
this is science mindfulness as a way of
rewiring the human brain. What if we
could make this simple and relatable and
accessible to everyone? This could be
one of the biggest opportunities and
businesses in the world. And I came
back. I remember chatting to Alex about
it and he was like, "Right, dude. You
finally get it. Let's go." Really?
[laughter]
Cuz he'd been he kind of knew this. And
this was all around the the time where
we'd been talking about um creating a
new business. Um he found a person that
owned calm.com the domain. And I
remember we were playing video games in
our house in Soho. And he said, "This
domain calm.com is available." And I
said, "Oh my god, what a great domain.
What a business we could build there
helping the world become more calm." And
I said, "How much is the domain?" And he
said, "Um, it's about a million pounds."
And I said, "Right, [laughter]
[__] off."
Uh, yeah, we don't have money uh to uh
to buy that. But about a year later,
we're playing video games again. Uh a
consistent theme here.
And he said, "The guy that has karm.com
wants to to sell it, and he's willing to
to do a deal." And we were able to buy
it for much much less. Idemarked this
money to put a deposit down on a house.
um but thought buying calm.com might be
more sensible thing to do even though my
parents and [laughter] thought it was
the silliest idea. Uh but um yeah so we
bought karmm.com and that was uh that
was kind of the starting acorn that was
planted for for that business.
So here is where mine and Alex's paths
kind of crossed. So I had left my
company Walp when I described there um
and this was in the transition of me
starting social chain. So I knew I had
this thesis about social media. I moved
out to San Francisco to work at a place
called Monkey Inferno and I was helping
them with growth using social media. I
still had like millions and millions of
followers online, maybe 10, 20, 30
million uh followers across multiple
Facebook, Instagram, like Twitter pages,
whatever.
And I was helping them scale their
products using social media. And as I
landed,
um Sean, who is the CEO there, said to
me, "Oh, kid just left called Alex." He
said, "He's gone to do this meditation
app." And I swear to God, I thought,
"What a [__] hippie." I thought
[laughter] like, "What?" I thought,
"What a what a weird guy." He left here
to go do med cuz at the it's different
now. At the time, meditation was like
hippie hocus pocus nonsense.
Yeah,
I remember thinking it how I feel now.
Do you know what? You weren't you
weren't the only person. People would
back away from us at parties when we
said we were building a meditation
company. And uh it was um and I remember
other people like thinking I'd had a a
nervous breakdown because of my previous
business and now I was setting up a
meditation company that they oh good
good luck with your nonprofit mate
[laughter]
with all the healing and like wearing it
had such negative connotations for
something that is so valuable and
transformational. It's extraordinary. As
an entrepreneur you look for those
moments and we both felt society was
going to shift. We didn't think it would
take as long as it did but we felt there
was change coming. that actual story um
about how I felt when Sean told me that
and then watching what that company
became this multi-billion dollar just
business that everybody knows that I
everyone that I know speaks to has
taught me a very profound lesson about
life which is when you play at that kind
of like intersection of disbelief and
belief where you're like again I the
analogy I use is the wave coming into
shore like you guys were really early
with the surfboard
and you were betting on that wave coming
into shore And every when so now I look
for I want to play in spaces where
there's high levels of skepticism
but I feel like it's inevitable y
and I always think about that conver
that when I always think about calm
because I was skeptic the wave came in
and I was like wildly wrong
and I just wish I'd left [laughter] with
Alex.
I think you've done quite all right.
There's multiple multiple routes to huge
success but that's so interesting you
said that. Yeah, it I'm thinking back
now to again that time when it was so
nonobvious. I remember the number of
meetings we had with investors where
they were like, well, this is so niche.
You can get meditations for free on
YouTube and and if no one is going to
pay for this and mental health is
something that isn't talked about,
mental health has stigma around it. How
on earth are you going to build a
business and get people to talk about
their mental health? And we're like, no,
the world is changing. This is
important. What is more important than
our minds? Look at all the people
suffering, all the clinical depression,
the anxiety, the PTSD. Surely at some
point we're going to wake up to this and
the the penny will flip and the light
bulb will go on in society. Again, it
took years, but eventually uh it
happened. And now, thank goodness we get
it. You know, if people often say that
there's a an often quoted stat that one
in four people will suffer from mental
health issues in their life. It's not
one in four, it's one in one. Anyone who
has a mind has mental health and some
days it's great and some days it's not.
Anyone who has a body has physical
health and some days you can run up a
mountain and other days you can't get
out of bed. And we have to understand
this and we have to respect and learn
about our minds because there is nothing
more important. Solving the global
mental health crisis which is the
mission of calm I think is one of the
most important challenges in the world.
It's a first order problem because if we
can end all this unnecessary suffering,
if people can become masters of their
mind instead of controlled by their
minds, everything starts to change. You
know, we can start to tackle the climate
change and inequality and racism and
homelessness and all these other
problems that stem from people having
healthy minds with greater resilience
and empathy and compassion and
gratitude. So yeah, it's uh it I get
very passionate about this as Alex and
the team do, but we think it's a very
important mission that we're working on.
I agree.
Thank you.
I can't think of a more important one
other than maybe climate change, but you
know, survival and happiness seem like
the two fundamentals. I mean, happiness
is maybe not the right word, but um
survival and um enjoying life. So like
making sure we have life and then
enjoying the life we do have. Feels like
that must be the the two sort of
foundational challenges and
opportunities of our time.
Exactly. Helping people not just survive
but to thrive in life. And and why not?
And the human brain is the most complex
thing in the known universe. You know,
90 billion neur neurons, trillions of
connections between them, and yet it
doesn't come with an instruction manual.
We're not taught this in schools, or we
certainly weren't when we were growing
up. It's starting to change, thank
goodness. But we're just left to to get
on with life. And no wonder there's so
much suffering and unhappiness and and
uh mental health issues. And it doesn't
need to be that way. And I think
meditation and mindfulness is it's
almost like a way of um upgrading your
OS, your your mind. It enables you to to
see and the world differently and and to
think differently. And it's not a silver
bullet, but it's a it's an important
starting point to then build upon.
It's a great way to upgrade your
operating system, you said. So, how does
that work from a neuroscience
perspective? How is it upgrading my OS?
What's what's happening?
Well, so this is this can get quite
complex, but at a sort of basic level,
uh the amygdala, it would the amygdala
is the the oldest part of our brain and
most people operate from there. And in
very very simple terms, what building a
meditation practice and becoming more
mindful does is it changes our
our reliance from the amygdala to more
prefrontal cortex thinking where we're
able to to plan a little bit more to
think into the future to put things into
perspective. One way of thinking about
it and a real kind of key moment for me
as I developed my meditation practice
was I now
respond to situations in life instead of
reacting. And that seems like what is he
talking about? But when you stop and
think about it, it's we have so much
stimulation in life. So many things
happen and most of us react. You know,
your [clears throat] first thought,
someone cuts you up in traffic, you honk
your horn. your partner says something
slightly passive aggressive, you snap
straight back at them into a big
argument. What if there was a slight
pause, a fraction of a second where you
held and you thought and you kicked in
you your awareness enabled you to
respond to that stimulation rather than
reacting. Another is, you know, a good
analogy is going to the gym. We talked
about the physical and and the mental
and our minds and our bodies are very
interconnected. But we go to the gym and
we lift weights and that that resistance
builds up the the muscle the the
strength um in our body. Meditation is
like going to the mental gym. It's a way
of building up the the strength of your
mind. It enables in it in everyday life
to be more aware to improve our
attention. And my goodness, we need that
muscle of attention in this modern age
because never have we been assailed
with more noise and stimulation from
social media to billboards to TV. It's
coming at us constantly. And one of the
most valuable skills in the 21st century
is to be able to decide where and how
and when we put our attention.
That is a dying art.
It is. Are you optimistic about our
ability to correct course?
[sighs and gasps]
This is a this is a big question. I am
optimistic. I'm I'm very very glass half
full person. And I do despite the many
many challenges we see in the world. Uh
it feels like the world is inflamed and
in crisis. If we listen to the news and
we look at traditional media, I think
the world is actually getting better in
many many different ways. You know,
there's a wonderful book, Factfulness,
which talks about the data of how the
world is getting better. As I say, it
doesn't always seem it. So, I am
optimistic. And I'm optimistic also
because we're seeing this incredible
shift in society where people are taking
more care of their minds that it is okay
to be vulnerable and to talk about your
mental health to your partner, to your
friends, to your boss. Can you believe
that a few years ago? The idea of asking
your boss for a a mental health day off
or or saying It would have been you
probably got fired and now
not all companies but but most companies
are starting to recognize how important
that is and I think that is fantastic
for society.
The trajectory of calm has been just
phenomenal. Um was there a tipping point
as such? Was there a moment where you
thought oh my god this is actually going
to work? And also conversely was there a
moment where you thought no. [snorts]
So when we were out there on our
surfboards and it was freezing cold and
everyone thought we were mad waiting for
that wave to come, yeah, we did feel as
if this this wasn't working. Alex and I
had some very kind of difficult,
stressful conversations wondering how
many more years we need to wait, but um
and we couldn't we found it very
difficult to raise money. We we were
able to get some seed money uh in the
early days, but the bridge between the
seed money we raised and getting to a
series A took years and years. And we
had no choice to make the business
profitable. We had to have an incredibly
lean team. There was only about six or
seven of us for for for a long time. And
we were running out of money. And I
remember I think this is around sort of
2015. We had to get very creative with
how we kept the lights on in the
business. And I gave a talk um and there
was a lady in the audience uh Venicia
from Penguin. And she emailed me
afterwards and said, "Oh, your story is
fascinating. could we make a book about
calm? And I was like, um, well, it's not
really core. It's not our key focus at
the moment, but okay, could we talk
about an advance? [laughter]
And literally, our cash amounts would
were dwindling. And um, she said,
"Sure." And the money that came in from
that offer um, kept the business going.
So, a very unusual way to to keep the
lights on at a startup. So, we're very
grateful to to Venanisha and the Penguin
team. And then we had a subscription
business model. So, uh, we put the price
up from $10 a year to $40 a year, which
was a key tipping point because we
didn't see any drop off in signups,
which was just amazing. So, we started
to make more money. We realized this
service that we were offering, these
meditations were valuable for for
people. They they were really getting
something out of it. And then that was
where the point was like, hang on a
minute, we're taking off. It's going,
it's happening. That was then you shift
from kind of uh the ice cold uh winter
to just holding on to the rocket ship
for dear life.
Trying to stay on the surfboard.
Exactly. Yeah. Mixing metaphors there,
but the rocket ship surfboard was was
away.
Yeah. Okay. And then that it presents a
whole another set of challenges. You've
got to hire people. You've got to
raise more money, scale up. How was that
for you?
We were we were underway there and um
again the business was starting. It was
an extraordinary place to be because we
were bringing in a lot of um downloads
and we were generating a lot of revenue.
I think we got to about 8 million
downloads before spending any money on
marketing. And this is an important
lesson that I that I always say to to
entrepreneurs.
Don't pour gasoline on the fire until
the fire is is going. You know, the
gasoline is is the marketing. Get to
product market fit first. kind of don't
don't turn on those afterburners until
you really understand your business. And
we did. We knew we had something. It was
a way. We were really really roaring.
And so a lady joined us called Dunn uh
who's just brilliant at user
acquisition. And she understood Facebook
marketing inside out. And that was the
kind of the next sort of uh piece of the
puzzle that really started to to take
the business to the next level. And when
I looked at the app store, you now have
the word sleep in the title as well
of calm. So it started with
predominantly meditation and now you've
kind of branched out into sleep and I'm
sure that's just another step in many
steps. So sleep, why why is sleep
important? Where does that fit? Yeah.
Well, we'd seen something interesting in
the data. About 11:00 every night all
around the world, we saw this big spike
in usage and we realized that people
were listening to Tamara's voice to help
them fall asleep. And we were like,
"What? Don't do that. That's not what
that's not how you meditate." And uh we
were like, "Well, hang on. Maybe there's
something here." And so that led to
sleep stories. We took this age-old
[sighs]
thing of uh a bedtime story, which we
all love. Um and we kind of modernized
it and we created a sleep story. And
it's a mix of a a beautiful soothing
voice with sound effects with music. And
it starts in a really sort of
interesting engaging way and then
gradually becomes more soporific. So
instead of your traditional three arc uh
structure of a story, we call it a story
slope. Um Chris who runs our sleep
stories kind of uh has pioneered this.
And so before you know it, you're
listening. Your your brain is engaged.
Instead of wondering about your to-do
list or what someone said to you at work
that day, you're engaged in the story.
And then before you know it, we've taken
you into uh a state where you're half
awake, half asleep, that liinal mode,
and then you're fast asleep. And very
few people get to hear the end of the
story. And this was just huge. Hundreds
of millions of them have been listened
to. We've had massive amounts of press.
Lots of celebrities have reached out to
us wanting to read them. And uh uh the
final thing I'll say on this is the
great thing about sleep is what a
market. 7.8 8 billion people go to sleep
every single night of their life.
Or try.
Or try. Exactly. Um so if you can create
something new, if you can create a new
habit around bedtime, if you can make
your evening routine a little more
interesting and entertaining, um and
help solve a problem, oh my goodness,
you can build something huge. And that's
what Sleep Stories has been for Calm. So
that was the next massive massive growth
area.
There's a lot of misconceptions around
sleep and insomnia. and I've I've seen
you talk about some of them online. What
are some of the big misconceptions that
you've discovered during your work with
sleep and insomnia that people tend to
believe about sleep that are most
harmful or least conducive with being a
successful sleeper?
Well, sleep has gone through a similar
kind of metamorphosis in society as
mindfulness has. You know, just a few
years ago, uh it used to be a badge of
honor to show off how little sleep you
got for something we spend a third of
our life doing. People gave it very
little thought and and respect and uh
that shifted. You know, Matthew Walker's
book, Why We Sleep, has has played a
huge part in that. Hopefully, calm has
played some part in of that as well. So,
I think the biggest thing is people just
recognizing how important it is.
Everyone needs a a sort of different
amount of sleep depending on our genes.
Somewhere between 7 and 9 hours sleep
every night. Uh for me, I need about 8
and a quarter uh to feel good. I don't
know if you know your level. You can
probably cope on about 3 hours. I
imagine given how much you do.
[laughter]
I need to figure that out. But I've I've
I mean I've Yeah, it's I was thinking
about something you said earlier about
how in your toughest times you you know
when uh mine candy was struggling you
started to neglect like the fundamentals
of being a human being.
Yeah.
Like nutrition and water and sleep.
These these these things have become
like as you said I mean it's changing
slowly now but they became like
disregarded as as being important
things. It's like we got further from
being human beings. Y
and it's like I I I write about in my
book as well that it's so it's so um
inspiring and amazing that a lot of the
cures to the ailments or the mental
health ailments in our lives or the
problems we encounter are just like
going back to being a human being like
drink water instead of coke like try not
to drink too much caffeine sleep
y
talk to your friends it's like
[laughter] there's no like there's no
like and but the problem is as well
there is a culture of trying to make the
solutions feel complex so I can sell you
some [__] whereas really they appear to
be so simple.
Well said. We always look for the over
complicated solution, don't we? We think
it has to be but fundamentally those are
the basics that you just mentioned.
Johan Hari talks about in his book. Lost
Connections is one of my favorite books.
We're disconnected from what made us
human as our brains and bodies evolved
over 100,000 plus years. And it's so
basic. So sleep is one of those key
things. And if we're not getting enough
good sleep, if we're disrespecting it,
if we're drinking alcohol before we go
to bed, it affects every aspect of our
life. And we're more irritable. We're
less creative. Our memory gets shot. We
we just go into a negative compounding
situation. And uh so yeah, treating
sleep with respect, I think, is one of
the most important things we can do.
Quick one. As many of you know, I've
been trying to make my life a little bit
more sustainable as it relates to
energy. Ever since I sold my Range Rover
Sport and bought an electric bicycle and
My Energy as a sponsor of this podcast,
one of the brands that make that
transition much, much easier. They are
at the forefront of British renewable
eosmart technology and their products
are really, really changing the game. If
you're on YouTube, you can see what I'm
holding in my hand. This is called the
Eddi, right? It's the UK's number one
solar powered diverter. So, what is a
solar diverter? It's a device for people
like you and me. That means you can
divert your excess energy back into your
home rather than back into the grid,
which will save you power and money.
It's super userfriendly and easy to
install, and you can control it using
the My Energy app on your phone. To find
out more about this product and more
products like it that will help you make
that sustainable transition, head over
to myenergy.com. And um I highly
recommend you check out the Eddie. It's
um it's a real game changer for a
product and one that I'm going to be
installing in my home soon. Tough time,
sleepless nights. Let's talk about that
then this year
difficult for everybody
for everyone's own reasons some people
lost their jobs some people lost family
members some people lost their I guess
their purpose in life generally and and
a lot of people because we're all now
you know we were pushed to live our
lives through glass screens more than
ever before lost a lot of other things
and um how was this how has this last
year and this tumultuous pandemic been
for you.
It's been [sighs and gasps] a
very challenging time. Uh the pandemic,
as you say, has affected everybody on
earth in in many many different ways. It
it has been extraordinarily difficult.
So my perspective is is more, you know,
a personal uh perspective. But I think
stepping back a little bit, if we go
back to 2020, you know, when this first
hit, it was all unknown. There was a lot
of anxiety. Uh but this was uh we were
in this together and there was a lot of
uh intrigue about what was going on. We
didn't have to commute into the office
anymore. We could work from home. Zoom
was this incredible opportunity. And so
2020 for for myself uh and the whole
company I think generally was was um not
too bad. You know it was it was uh it
was all bearable. 2021 for myself
personally has been pretty challenging.
I think months and months and months of
staring into a tiny little screen
hunched over my laptop like everybody
else has taken its toll. And I didn't
treat my posture with respect. I didn't
I didn't look after my mental health the
way I should and I started to this
started to compound and I I had quite a
serious back problem. I had a a a
herniated disc um because of all the
hunching and that pushed on a nerve
which meant I couldn't walk and I had
very serious pain every day um which
meant uh uh I couldn't sleep very well.
Um I saw multiple physios. I started to
take painkillers which stopped the pain
but then filled my head with cotton wool
and so but I still had to work and I
still had to kind of um communicate with
my team and lead the company and I
couldn't do exercise and so for many
many months I was not in a great place.
It was a very very difficult uh summer
and beyond this year.
Um so yeah 2021 has been tricky. Uh I'm
in a much better place now, but it it it
has been very very challenging and I'm
very fortunate in that, you know, I
haven't lost any loved ones and it's
we've got to put things in perspective.
But from a health and and work uh angle,
uh this is, I think, been one of the the
toughest, if not the toughest years that
that I've I've personally been through.
So many people, as you've described
there, staring at the screen every day,
end up burning themselves out. What's
your experience with burnout as a topic
and is that what you're describing
happened this year?
I think it was a combination of things.
I think it was burnout connected to
chronic stress connected to the back
pain and um again all these things start
to negatively compound the lack of
exercise. Uh I was living on my own and
and didn't have uh much kind of human
connection. um all these things kind of
came together and and created a perfect
storm and we have over 300 people at
calm now and the team were going through
their own versions of of that. It
certainly wasn't just me struggling. And
we do this survey every six months
called Culture AMP where the whole team
kind of answers a bunch of questions and
they can leave anonymous comments. We
had thousands of anonymous comments and
the last one we just did and we've never
seen anything like it in in the data.
The the the the number of people talking
about stress and burnout is way beyond
anything I've ever seen in my career.
And so I think it is just now we've been
in this situation for 18 months and it
has just gone on and on and on. It's
it's really affected everyone and we're
seeing this now across pretty much every
company.
At the start of the the lockdown going
back I think what companies were seeing
was a real surprise. Instead of people
bunking off and taking it easy and
putting their feet up and watching
Netflix all day, people were working
harder. We saw this at calm um and I
think many companies have. I think there
was a Harvard study done recently
showing that the average workday has
increased by almost an hour when people
are working from home. So people are
working harder. They they can't really
switch off. There's no boundary between
work and and nonwork. And it's creating
this this compounding um toll on the
minds and and bodies of of everybody. So
it's a crisis. It it's a very very
serious uh issue. We are taking this
very seriously at KM. Obviously, we uh
uh we want to support uh our own team
and other companies around the world.
And just a few things that we've tried
to do, we're still figuring this out
ourselves, figuring out what the best
way to work and support our teams are.
So, one thing is we have, you know,
unlimited holiday, but teams don't take
them cuz it's very hard to do. I've
taken a few breaks uh during the
pandemic, but I don't think I've had a
single break where I wasn't on at least
one Zoom call or I didn't check Slack or
email at least once or twice a day. And
we made the decision back in October to
do a mental health week. We've done a
few mental health days where everyone
sort of steps away. And previously, I'd
have said what a ridiculous idea. Who on
earth gives the whole company a week
off? You know, we are in such a
competitive space. We can't afford to do
that. and we did it and we agreed it
would be the right thing to do and I
think it's one of the smartest decisions
we've we've made in the in the history
of the company because it gave the whole
company a chance to properly step away
and recharge their batteries knowing
that there wasn't any calls they were
missing or any important things going on
and you know what we came back a week
later and everything was fine the
business was still there we fortunately
we had a few colleagues that stayed to
make sure everything stayed up and could
support our audience but yeah that was
one of the smartest things uh we
to support the mental health of the
team.
What changes have you made now in your
life based on the last year which you
describe as being the hardest of your
your life um to make sure that you are
taking better care of yourself as you've
as you've alluded to.
Yes. And so there were a few other
reasons why it was a very hard year sort
of beyond work which um uh were
compounding all all the different
challenges. I just think I've learned a
lot about being a better leader by
developing kind of a meditation practice
and being more mindful of so many
different things. One is just not
getting sucked into the the highs and
lows of the entrepreneurial journey. You
know, nothing is ever amazing or as
disastrous as it seems. And I think
teams want to follow calm leaders who
are stable and, you know, celebrate the
winds, but but don't get sucked into the
vortex of of ne negativity when things
go wrong.
I don't go to bed anymore doing emails
and waking up in the middle of the night
with a phone glued to my face. I don't
reach for my phone first thing in the
morning anymore as something like 60% of
people do because suddenly uh instead of
gently coming into the day and letting
your mind kind of calibrate with the the
world, you're you're throwing yourself
into Twitter and Instagram and the news
cycle and everything else. I think
that's been a really really important
thing. um four areas that I that I
really think about that are the
foundations to uh being healthy and
looking after yourself, which then
enables you to look after your friends
and family and your your company and
employees. Um one is nutrition, what you
put into your body. Number two is
exercise, how you move your body. Um uh
so [snorts] important. Number three is
your mind. Taking care of that, you
know, developing a a practice that works
for you. And number four is sleep and
making sure you get that right. Sounds
very simple but you keep those things in
balance. You respect them and again
going back to this idea of a foundation
that is a very powerful foundation to
stand on to to do everything else you
want to do in life.
Amazing. I couldn't agree more that the
philosophy again about being being a
little bit more human. One of the things
that um wasn't on that list is in like
meaningful connections.
Mhm. And one, it's interesting because
when I was reading through your story,
and if I'm being nosy here, just tell me
to [__] off. Like, I'm feeling like
I couldn't Yeah. I couldn't I couldn't
um I couldn't see you speak openly much
about your your relationships and your
like,
you know, that that kind of thing.
Something I talk about a lot here
because I struggled a lot to form uh
relationships over many years for lots
of different reasons.
Ego problems, thought the world revolved
around me.
Yeah.
like totally selfish guy, unwilling to
compromise.
Flipping that question to you, how have
you gone through the years of building
these great companies and going through
the tumultuous storms of their, you
know, inevitable rise and fall and rise
whilst maintaining healthy romantic
relationships?
Yeah, good good question. I think we're
we're similar. And I think because I've
been so obsessed and focused on my my
business, I haven't been the best
partner to my girlfriends. And uh they
have been, you know, I look back and and
think of the many kind of mistakes I've
I've made along the way and how I
haven't kind of uh I haven't been
mindful and thoughtful and respectful in
the way that I uh connect with someone
on on that level. So yeah, I've done a a
lot of thinking and a lot of learning um
over lockdown and um I think it's made
me not just a better leader but a better
human being and a and a better person.
So um yeah, very excited about what
comes next on on that level.
Was there a moment where you realized
the true value of that of meaningful
connections with another person? Because
it took me a long time. I thought money
was the only thing that mattered in life
and I thought being successful and
people and being like well-known and all
these things and having a Lamborghini, I
thought that was the the pathway to
happiness. And at some point I realized
actually probably from learning like
vicariously through people who had who
like further up the path and were
miserable that I maybe needed to change
course. Was there a point where you and
I also remember listening to the TED
talk um about a 100redyear study of men
who were married or single and those
that were married
not only were healthier, they had less
disease
um they lived longer and they reported
to being happier. And then obviously I I
read Johanna Har's book one day while I
was actually in New York office and it
was just no one was in the office and
for some reason you know how like
YouTube loops through it stumbled onto
one of his conversations and I just
couldn't I was like I couldn't work I
was transfixed on what he was saying it
just the penny was just dropping for me
in so many ways about this like lost
connections and the the importance of
connection and purpose and I [__] I
sent him an email I was like come on my
podcast I had no listeners then so I'm
so glad he did it but I I became
obsessed with that and that's when I
started saying okay if the north star of
life is to be happy and fulfilled I need
to start compromising some of this like
money making selfishness
even though it feels so counter
counterproductive and pursue and invest
in
connections and romantic connections
so true and not yeah not just romantic
connections but friendship connections
family connections and when
entrepreneurs are stuck on their vision
and off they go holding on to that
rocket ship you sacrifice so much and
and it's not just money. I'm not driven
by money that I think that's a byproduct
of building something successful. To me,
what kind of puts the blinkers on is
just a big vision and just going
charging through walls and making it
happen. But even then, you're you're
sacrificing a lot along the way. And so,
being more thoughtful and a little more
mindful for this next phase, I have
recognized that I need to get a little
more balance uh in my life. I need to
make sure I am um when I'm in a
relationship that I'm supporting and
looking after and spending time with my
girlfriend, that I'm spending time with
my family, that I'm calling my mom every
day, that I'm, you know, uh
showing up for for people, you know,
when I'm playing with my daughter in the
playground, not feeling that urge to
check my phone, but being fully fully
present. And it's it's not easy to do,
but it's incredibly important because
yeah, I I mentioned those four things
that are important to building that
foundation, but nothing in life matters
more important than our relationships
that we build throughout our life. So
that has been a massive learning for me.
And uh yeah,
I'm asking this question maybe because I
want the answer for myself, but I I I I
feel myself so much in your words, which
is knowing the right answer, but
struggling to do it.
Yes.
When it comes down to it,
yeah,
how how
Oh, it's such such an important
question. I'm still trying to figure
this out myself. One of the things that
developing a meditation practice has
helped me do uh is improve my empathy.
And um I now am better at seeing the
world through other people's eyes. And
before that, again, very selfcentered
and self-centric. I couldn't do it. And
I used to just assume my girlfriends
thought just the way I do that their
brains were wired like mine. if I
thought they had a [sighs] if I thought
there was an area they needed some help
on, I'd buy a self-help book for them to
to to sharpen them up because that's
what I'd love to happen. And then I
realized that no, our brains are wired
very differently. They need very
different things. They need that she
needs her emotions validated instead of
me trying to solve the problem every
time she uh mentions something. So, I
think that's made a massive massive
shift. And I think just again being
being more responsive instead of
reactive. So when you can you just hear
better. You the brightness has turned up
on life when you develop a a meditation
practice. You can see these warning
signs of what someone needs and then
respond to them instead of just being
lost in your own world. So if your
girlfriend is asking you for a walk or
if she is saying something to you, you
not only hear what she's saying, you can
understand what's behind it as well. And
I think uh that's important. Again, not
easy to do and get right all the time,
but it's it's it's vital if you are to
build strong, healthy relationships in
life.
Communication,
vulnerability,
all kind of all kind of mixed together.
I mean, great communication, I think, is
whether it's with your team or with your
partner is centered on being open and
vulnerable about how you're feeling.
What journey have you been on in in
terms of learning how to be a good
communicator, whether it's with your
girlfriend or whether it's with your
team, what is the what is the the
foundations of successful communication?
I remember my grandmother uh many years
ago telling me when I was jabbering away
and talking non-stop at a a dinner as a
young lad. She said, "Michael, you have
two ears and one mouth. Use them in that
ratio." [laughter] I was like, "What are
you talking about, grandma?" Um, but the
the penny dropped, you know, years
later. Uh, and I try and listen a lot
more than I talk. And I try not to do
that thing that most people do is when
they're talking, just not listening,
just getting ready to say the next
thing. And also respecting and
understanding that that people have
different viewpoints and different life
experiences and there isn't
ones and zeros. It isn't right and
wrong. Life is not black or white. It's
beautiful shades of gray and nuance. And
I think we've lost that, you know, in
the culture wars and the the the intense
political environment of today and the
immediate dopamine
frazzled social media world that we we
live in. So
yes, to in in in short, just trying to
to to listen and understand where
someone is coming from. I think a good
whenever you're in a an argument with
with a partner, a a very good technique
I've learned is instead of just back and
forth, I'm right, you're wrong, and
getting nowhere is pausing and stopping
and and saying letting them talk and
instead of firing back and telling them
why they're wrong, replaying what
they've said and having them and seeing
that light come on their eyes and going,
"Oh my god, you get it." and them doing
the same for you and you're like, "Wow,
all right." Simple little breakthroughs
uh like that I think um are very
effective,
isn't it? It's so true. My my girlfriend
started to say something to me which
really opened my eyes to this. She said,
"I just want to be understood."
And so I tried that as a technique
exactly what you've described, which is
when she's finished giving me her side
of the of events, I will repeat back to
her what she said to me. Yeah. Yeah,
cuz and I'll say to I want to be like
super clear that I understand here what
you're saying is and you can see her
smile. It's like
because when you're in combat, it's so
unclear whether the message is landing.
So you it ends up being this like broken
record of I'll try and land it again.
I'll try and land it again. I'll such a
pacifying amazing thing if you're
actually trying to solve a problem
versus trying to win a win a battle
to rec as you said to use that tactic of
sort of point recognition.
Well said. Esther Pel is is brilliant at
at this. um she's written some amazing
books on relationships and podcasts and
yeah, she understands the the nuance of
all this better than anyone. So, if
anyone's struggling with their
relationship, I'd suggest uh doing some
homework with Esther.
One might think that the founders of an
app like Calm that has reached so many
people um and that continues to scale
and do so much good in the world must be
the most calm humans ever. They must
have peaceful,
you know, super just like I kind of
imagine them being like living in Bali,
[laughter] like long hair, like just,
you know, like couple of like tattoos,
like t-shirt with their chakras
pinpointed on. Um, that's what one would
assume cuz that's what the way people
assume [__] like how accurate is that
for you and Alex?
Uh, not accurate. and and I think that
there's a little bit of that and I think
we have certainly
become a little more like that on this
journey but um no I think one of the
reasons why calm has been successful is
that that is not the brand that we have
built. We've tried to help people learn
this practice that is thousands of years
old in a very modern way. As I mentioned
earlier, made it simple, relatable, um,
added a bit of fun, sprinkled a bit of
Hollywood stardust on top of it. You
know, as as Mary Poppins once wisely
said, a spoonful of sugar helps the
medicine go down. And so we have tried
to respect the authentic roots of
mindfulness, but also adapt it for the
modern age. And so being calm isn't just
about sitting in a lotus position 16
hours a day on on top of a mountain. It
is about weaving it thoughtfully
throughout your life. Uh so you can
improve your own journey through life
and and those of all the people around
you.
I think like you know I always conclude
this podcast with like you know thinking
of uh something nice to say to the guest
but in your case you've just done a
tremendous service to the world and it's
so obvious what the the compliment is
for you. Like I I think of all the
things I've done in my life and I'm like
the the the good you've done by building
that business to millions of people you
will never meet. I mean [__] hell.
You know what I If if if businesses are
seen as vehicles for change in the
world,
unbelievable.
Like unbelievable. Imagine there's
people in the Do you ever do you ever
like feel that that there's there's some
young girl in the corner of India or
some country a gazillion miles away that
you've made and your team have made
their day a little bit better?
Something horrific's happened to them, a
stress they've gone through, something
you've helped them cope. Do you ever
like do you know what I mean? That is
just it just feels like the most
incredible thing.
Oh, well, [snorts] I really appreciate
you saying that. Thank you.
Do you feel that?
I do. We do as a as a team. Um, we have
what we call the warm fuzzies channel uh
in our Slack at at work and we read one
out in in every big meeting of how calm
has changed someone's life. And um
whenever we're having a really tough day
and we're really stressed and and this
helped me this difficult year is going
on the app store and reading the
millions. Don't read all of them, but
there are millions of five-star reviews
covering all aspects of life. It's just
the most incredible tonic to recognize
the impact we've had. It's everything
from little kids who are being bullied
at school who find calm kind of
supportive and helpful for them to
couples that were on the brink of
divorce doing the daily calm every day
and it it reuniting their love to
addicts giving up um their drugs to
people who are suicidal having their
lives saved because calm and the the
content that we create has has
transformed them. It's it's goosebump
inducing and and we feel very lucky and
grateful that we get to work on this
every single day. Unbelievable. Well,
thank you because you've done the most
uh most incredible service to the world.
We talked earlier about the the two
foundational challenges of our time
being like saving the planet and then
making sure the people on it are, you
know, fulfilled, happy, whatever you you
know, calm. Um and that's exactly what
you're doing. So, thank you. Thank you.
Um I'm also, as you know, a big someone
who's very interested and trying to
support the mental health crisis in
whatever way I can. And actually one of
the joint investments we have is um in a
company called a Thai. I I heard about
psychedelics. I dabbled. Sue me. Um you
got no evidence um other than my words.
Um I dabbled in I did magic mushrooms
for the first time and then I was
reading the data and the research online
and I was looking for companies and I
came across Compass Pathways and then a
Thai Life Sciences which is using
psychedelics and non-csychedelic um
therapies to help cure the mental health
crisis. And then when I joined the
company as an investor and as the
creative director now I learned that you
were an investor as well.
Yes.
Why did you support that company?
Wow. I think this could be a a whole new
podcast all on its own. I'll give a a
short answer. I think psychedelics
will play an incredibly important role
in solving the global mental health
crisis. uh these compounds that have
been under our nose for decades and
vilified, you know, from the war on
drugs back in the the 60s could could
and the scientific evidence is showing
that they may well be able to help
hundreds of millions of lives. Um, so
that to me ties into K's mission and I
think it's incredible work that they're
doing there. Not just with psilocybin,
but with ketamin, with iberane, with
MDMA, a whole range of of different
substances that that interact on the
brain in different ways. Those compounds
combined with therapy in the right set
and setting, I I think it is it is a a a
golden key that uh can unlock so much
positivity for humanity. So that's why I
invested and uh also because Christian
Anger who's part of the company I met
him years and years ago. He came into
the comm office like a tornado and I
thought whatever he is on I want some of
that and I was like where do I sign I'm
in. And um so yeah very proud uh
investor and supporter of that business.
Amazing. So as I told you there's a
closing tradition we have here on the
di. It's a new one but I love it. Our
previous guest has written a question
for you.
What is the pain you enjoy having?
Pain is horrible. No one wants it. But
pain serves a very important purpose.
It uh it alerts us to
a problem. And uh without pain senses we
are [snorts]
going through life blind and and it's
very dangerous. So pain whether it's
mental or physical is horrible but it's
valuable
and so any type of pain rather than just
ignoring it and trying to mask it. It's
important to lean in and listen to it.
So uh I could give many many different
examples. Maybe one we've talked a
little bit about today is the sleepless
nights. It's it's the pain of waking up
at 4:00 a.m. in the morning in a cold
sweat staring at the ceiling [sighs] and
being so unhappy and frustrated with
that development.
But recognizing that that pain, that
mental pain is there for a purpose. It's
my subconscious brain telling me to pay
attention and to sort out a problem that
I'm not addressing during my waking
hours.
Brilliant. Thank you so much, Michael.
It's been such a tremendous honor um
having this conversation with you and I
can speak to you for hours, but I won't.
Um [clears throat] I followed you for a
good decade since Moshi Monsters and I I
saw your meteor meteoric rise then and
you've you've risen even higher and done
even more goodness to the world with
your with Karm and along with Alex. And
I just want to say thank you. Thank you
for the inspiration. you're one of the
entrepreneurs that inspired me, you
know, when I started out and you've
you've continued to inspire me to this
day with your sense of purpose, but also
your entrepreneurial prowess. So, um
it's an honor to meet you. It's an honor
to have you on the show and uh you've
been just, you know, superb, superb as a
guest.
Well, thank you and thank you to you for
for having these conversations. Um
during lockdown I lived on the west
coast of Ireland in in Gway and I would
run up and down the prominard by the sea
god knows how many thousand times and
listen to your
podcast multiple times through the rain
and the wind and just been just so
inspired and delighted by that and uh so
thank you for that.
Oh well you've you've continued to the
the tradition and you've you've um added
to it in a really profound way. I really
really mean that. Thank you so much
Michael.
Thank you. [music]
Heat. Heat. N.
[music]
Heat. Heat.
[singing]
[music]